Of all the major cities in the world
with uh questionable locations, there's
got to be one of them that's the most
questionable of all. And I would argue
that it's probably this place in the
middle of Siberia. Here in the depths of
winter, the average low temperature will
hover around -42°
C.
An entire week can pass by where it
never gets above -40° at all. That's
cold enough that if you dare to venture
outside, your exposed fingers can
receive frostbite damage in as little as
3 to 7 minutes. While your exposed nose
and cheeks can receive frostbite damage
between 5 and 8 minutes, even if the
rest of your body is completely bundled
up appropriately. Engine oil used in
cars can be in a thickened like glue and
even freeze at these kinds of
temperatures. Fuel lines will freeze,
batteries will die, tires will split
open, and even metal can become brittle
and crack when you hit it, which leads
to residents of this city usually
running their car engines for hours
overnight during the winter, which
leaves parking lots looking like huge
fields of idling vehicles. Groceries
bought at the store might freeze solid
by the time you get back home. And it's
so brutally cold that fish for sale in
markets can simply be left outside on
display for days or even weeks at a time
because the ambient temperature outside
is going to be colder than any freezer
and it'll preserve them all the same.
This extreme city's name is Yakuts, a
place that's probably most well known to
Westerners as a space in the board game
Risk. However, with a surprisingly large
population of more than 370,000
people today in the real world, it is
far from your typical small Arctic
outpost. There is no bigger settlement
that can be found in any direction for
thousands of kilometers. While Yakuts is
also notably the largest city in the
world that's ever been founded within
the permafrost zone, the regions in the
Northern Hemisphere where the soil
remains permanently frozen year-round
and have remained frozen for thousands
of years, and where conducting
agriculture, growing your own food, and
supporting a large population are all
very very difficult. And so, what's even
stranger than is the density of the
population in Yakuts relative to its
overall region. The city is the capital
of Russia's Sakha region, the largest
country subdivision in the world that's
roughly twice the size of Alaska. Placed
over the United States, Sakha is so huge
that it would encompass basically the
entire eastern half of the country. And
yet, across this entire huge stretch of
territory lives fewer than 1 million
people today, nearly 40% of whom all
just live within the capital city of
Yakuts, surrounded by hinterland that
can hardly support any agriculture at
all.
Yakuts is a genuinely big city and a
thriving regional capital complete with
universities, theaters, shopping malls,
and high-rise apartments that all exist
in this brutal environment that makes it
by far the coldest major city on the
planet. The coldest temperature ever
recorded in Yakuts during the winter is
about -64°
C,
an almost unbelievable sensation if
you've never experienced it that's even
colder than the surface of Mars gets
during some seasons. [music] In the same
general area where Yakuts is located,
the absolute lowest temperatures ever
recorded on our planet have been
measured anywhere outside of Antarctica
and Greenland. And yet, neither of those
places have a metropolis home to
hundreds of thousands of residents.
[music] Yakuts is thus a truly bizarre
anomaly in the world of human geography,
and for many more reasons than just its
cold environment. And that begs the
ultimate question, why does a big city
of this significant of a size even exist
at all within an environment so
objectively hostile to human life? And
what sort of unique challenges does
living and working in the world's
coldest city entail for your everyday
person there?
The area around modern-day Yakuts has
been inhabited by indigenous peoples for
thousands of years, but was always
extremely remote and sparsely populated
for basically all of history until
relatively modern times because of the
climate. It's basically like a late-game
settlement in one of the Sid Meier
Civilization games that you found just
in order to gain access to the area's
resources. The ethnic Yakuts people, who
refer to themselves as the Sakha,
migrated into the area around Yakuts
sometime around the 13th and 14th
centuries from the northern shores of
Lake Baikal further to the south after
they were displaced by the expanding
Mongols. A Turkic people, the Yakuts are
the northernmost of all the world's
Turkic ethnic groups today and their
language is closely related to the
Kazakh and Kyrgyz languages in Central
Asia. Beginning in the mid-16th century,
the Russian state began its centuries of
expansion across Siberia in the hunt for
valuable resources like fur, which was
used as both a form of currency and a
product that could be exported. In 1632,
Russian explorers at the frontier of
their expanding empire first entered
into the heartland of the Sakha deep in
Siberia, where they founded a small fort
that would eventually become the modern
metropolis of Yakuts. By the 1640s, the
Russians had managed to fully subjugate
the Sakha people. At this early point in
the settlement's history, the fort of
Yakuts was utilized as a place to
receive tribute paid in furs from the
local Sakha and other peoples in the
area in exchange for the Russians
generally leaving them alone to their
own affairs.
At the time, nobody could have possibly
envisioned that this remote colonial
outpost dedicated to harvesting fur
would eventually become a major
metropolis in the future. But Yakuts did
have at least one major geographic
advantage going for it that would later
help out its growth potential, its
location along the Lena River. The Lena
is a very very significant global river
system. It's actually the 11th longest
river in the world and it stretches for
thousands of kilometers from its source
at Lake Baikal in the south to its delta
in the Arctic Ocean in the north with
tributaries that fan out all across the
region. [music]
And Yakuts was well positioned along the
Lena River to control this whole system.
[music] And during the summer season,
the river is actually perfectly
navigable for a huge length of 3,540
km, making it a great river
transportation network during the
summer. The key phrase, of course, is
during the summer because this
navigability only lasts for about 70 to
125 days out of the year depending on
the exact location. And that's the only
time that the Lena remains navigable
because for more than 2/3 of the rest of
the year, the whole river is either
frozen solid [music] or it's all of
little icebergs that make any and all
navigation across it impossible.
Nonetheless, as a seasonally useful
inland port,
>> [music]
>> Yakuts was an ideal frontier location to
receive furs to ship upstream the Lena
down towards Lake Baikal, where from
there it was easier to export overland
further towards the core in European
Russia, especially after the later
advent of the Trans-Siberian Railway.
For centuries until the mid-1800s,
the Sakha region was basically entirely
exploited by the Russians as a resource
colony that almost completely focused on
fur. Because the soil in the region was
largely covered by permafrost, relying
on agriculture to sustain the economy
around the settlement was never going to
be a successful endeavor. And that also
kept the region's population and labor
force low since they couldn't really
grow their own food supply, [music]
limiting the region's economic potential
beyond resource exploitation even
further. By the end of the 19th century,
Yakuts was basically still just a small
frontier town that hardly anyone had
ever heard of. They reported a
population of only about 6,500 people in
the 1897 Russian Empire Census with the
overwhelming majority of ethnic Russians
in the town still involved in the fur
trade.
But then, across the 20th century,
everything would begin rapidly changing
for the town.
After the Soviet Union was established
in 1922, the territory of Sakha was
reorganized into the Yakut Autonomous
SSR, basically a semi-autonomous
territory of the Russian SSR, a status
that it largely inherited within Russia
after the Soviet collapse in the 1990s.
And the very next year afterwards in
1923, the new modern era of Yakuts
finally began when gold was discovered
by Soviet geologists in the south of the
Sakha region. Within only 2 years from
then by 1925, more than 13,000 ethnic
Slavs from Russia and Ukraine [music]
had flooded into the territory in the
search for gold and fortune. The Sakha
territory's gold rush had begun and it
would never be the same ever again. The
Soviet government under Stalin concluded
that the amount of voluntary labor
present in Sakha who were actually
willing to mine for gold was far too
insufficient to actually harvest the
amount of gold they wanted. So, they
began bringing in huge numbers of
involuntary labor instead through the
infamous Gulag system. Across Stalin's
reign, around 100 different camps,
prisons, and penal colonies were
established in the Gulag system all
across the Sakha territory, and at least
50,000 prisoners were brought into them
who were primarily used for labor in the
gold mines. In a sense, this was only a
dramatic continuation of the old Tsarist
policies in Siberia, which had long
treated Yakuts and the Sakha territory
specifically as effectively a prison
without any walls. In addition to its
use as a resource colony, political
dissidents who were exiled to the Sakha
territory didn't need to be kept under
constant surveillance or even housed in
prisons because where would they
actually go? Nothing else existed for
thousands of kilometers in any
direction, and the odds of survival out
there alone in the brutal wilderness and
climate were effectively zero, making
its location perfect as a dumping ground
for people who were politically or
socially undesirable by both the Tsarist
and later Soviet regimes alike.
All of this during the Stalinist era
made the population of both Yakuts and
the Sakha territory more broadly
explode. Between 1926 and 1959, the
population of Yakuts, the city, expanded
by more than seven times over from only
around 10,000 people to more than
70,000.
While the ethnic Yakuts or Sakha
themselves were diluted from more than
80% of the overall territory's
population in 1926 to less than half of
the population by 1959 due to the influx
of all of the Russians and Ukrainians
from the European core of the Soviet
Union. And as it turned out, gold was
far from the only valuable resource to
be found in the area, and it wouldn't
even be the most valuable resource,
either. As early as the 1930s, Soviet
geologists were commenting on the
similar nature of the geography found in
Siberia to South Africa, which led to a
lot of speculation that Siberia probably
had rich diamond deposits just like
South Africa had. After the Second World
War momentarily erupted all of the
exploration efforts for them, the first
rough diamond in the Sakha region was
finally discovered by Soviet geologists
in 1949. And then 5 years later in 1954,
shortly after Stalin's death, they hit
the mother lode in a rich kimberlite
pipe in Sakha that they called Zarnitsa.
And as it soon turned out from there,
the Sakha territory is actually the most
diamond-rich area in the world that's
ever been discovered anywhere outside of
Southern Africa. And this is what truly
caused the even more rapid explosion in
the territory's population across the
second half of the 20th century, as even
more Russians and Ukrainians began
migrating in in search of diamond
fortune. By the end of the 20th century,
the Sakha territory was producing as
much as 25% of the world's entire supply
of diamonds. And entire cities were
built up from scratch around all of the
various mines that were built using
prefabricated housing and staffed with
workforces that were largely imported
from the European core. During the
Soviet era, the salary that a worker
could earn in the diamond mines in Sakha
were roughly four times greater than the
Soviet average with generous bonuses
paid on top, which was more than enough
to attract tens of thousands of new
people to move to the territory despite
its brutal climate and working and
living conditions. And all of this led
to the rise and population and
development of Sakha's capital, Yakuts,
where the big diamond and gold mining
operations all began establishing their
regional offices and headquarters at.
Since the 1960s, every single year, more
than $1 billion worth of diamonds have
been mined up from the Sakha territory.
And by the end of the 1980s, diamond and
gold mining, along with smaller tin and
coal mining operations, were
collectively bringing about $4 billion
into the Soviet treasury every year. A
fortune that has led to the increasingly
rapid development of the regional
capital at Yakuts. Between 1959 and
1989, roughly from when the diamond
industry just started getting going to
just before the Soviet Union's collapse,
the population of Yakuts more than
doubled again from 74,000 people to more
than 186,000
people, complete with high-rise
apartments, museums, factories, and
airports. Meaning that by the twilight
years of the Soviet era, Yakuts had
already become a fairly large city from
basically nothing. Almost entirely
because of the emergence of the diamond
and gold mining industries in the
region. The biggest symbol of Soviet and
Russian mining operations that emerged
in the Sakha territory is the Mir open
pit mine, currently the fourth deepest
open pit mine globally and one of the
largest man-made holes on the planet.
It's 525 m deep and more than a full
kilometer wide. This hole is so big that
helicopters have been restricted from
flying over it because of the turbulent
air currents that the hole generates
above it. In their search for even more
valuable minerals in the territory, the
Soviets also conducted a series of
underground nuclear explosions across
the Sakha territory as well, that
continue to plague the region's
environment to this day. Over a period
of about 14 years between 1974 and 1988,
the Soviets are known to have conducted
at least 12 of these underground nuclear
explosions in the Sakha territory that
attempted to either use their seismic
waves to locate further minerals or to
utilize their explosive power to dig out
mines in place of conventional
explosives. But in the end, all they
really did was result in radioactive
contamination of the territory's soil
and aquifers that have made life even
more difficult than it already was
naturally.
>> [music]
>> And of course, the natural environment
around Yakuts is absolutely brutal. And
that has always made developing a city
here very unique and challenging. There
are many natural factors that combine to
make the area around Yakuts the coldest
place on the planet anywhere outside of
Antarctica and Greenland. The city
itself is located deep within the
Eurasian continent, thousands of
kilometers away from any nearby ocean.
Oceans generally moderate temperatures,
but Yakuts doesn't get to experience
that. And ironically, the climate a
thousand kilometers away, further to the
north on the coastline of the Arctic
Ocean, is even milder than it is down in
Yakuts, with average January
temperatures in the north of around
-20°C
compared to -40°C
further to the south inland in Yakuts.
The Siberian High, the strongest
high-pressure weather system in the
Northern Hemisphere, always brings in a
massive amount of extremely cold, dry
air from the Arctic that gets trapped
inland over central Siberia every winter
between September and April. This
significantly affects the climate around
Yakuts as well, exacerbated by the
omnipresent snow-covered taiga and
plains that reflect sunlight that
further helps to maintain the extremely
low temperatures.
The result is that weeks [music] at a
time in Yakuts can go without ever
rising above -40°C
in the winter. The coldest temperature
ever recorded in the city is an almost
unbelievable -64°C,
while the temperature has never been
recorded over freezing in the city once
between November 10th and March 14th.
Winters are long, dark, and ruthless in
Yakuts, but summers are also bizarrely
very hot and unforgiving as well. In the
summer, the temperature in Yakuts can
soar to as high as 41°C
or more than 100°F,
which means that Yakuts also experiences
by far the wildest temperature variation
of any major city throughout the year of
more than 100°C
difference between the winter lows of
-60 and summer highs of positive 40. And
even though the winters are brutally
cold, the area around Yakuts gets
absolutely infested with plagues of
insects and mosquitoes during the hot
summers anyway. The surrounding taiga,
wetlands, and floodplains of the Lena
River all create massive areas of
standing water after the snows melt. And
since the ground is underlain by
permafrost, the water doesn't drain well
and forms countless stagnant pools for
mosquitoes to breed in. So while the
winters kill most of the insects here,
huge numbers of them always hatch again
in an explosive growth during the short,
hot summers to the point where the
mosquito swarms in this region are
considered among the very worst in the
world during the summer that can cover
your exposed skin within seconds when
you're out of the city in the
surrounding countryside.
So as you can probably imagine, building
up the modern-day city of Yakuts in this
ridiculous environment that today is
somehow nearing a population of 400,000
people has been very difficult for any
number of reasons that makes it one of
the most extreme and fascinating human
settlements ever created. And because
it's located in the permafrost region
where the soil below the ground remains
permanently frozen throughout the year
up to 300 m deep, you might think that
that would allow for buildings to have
stable foundations, but it's actually
quite the opposite. Heat produced by
buildings placed on concrete foundations
directly on the ground will seep through
into the permafrost beneath the building
and melt it, causing the soil below to
turn to mud and shift, which causes the
foundation above to crack and the
building further above to sag and
eventually to sink and collapse. Thus,
most houses and structures in the city
are built on top of stilts that are
drilled up to 10 m deep into the ground
or concrete piles instead in order to
avoid this. All of the usual critical
infrastructure in a big city like wires
and pipes that are hidden out of sight
underground are exposed above the
surface for all to see in Yakuts
instead, because burying them
underground would melt the permafrost as
well. And as the world continues warming
in the 21st century, the Arctic is
warming at roughly twice the rate of the
rest of the world, which is increasingly
causing the permafrost beneath Yakuts to
melt and warp the structures above it
anyway. Sidewalks in the city shift and
warp as a result, making them feel like
walking over speed bumps. Buildings are
sagging and sinking anyway, and Yakuts
is slowly but surely collapsing despite
all of their best previous engineering
efforts.
All of this gives Yakuts an unusual
industrial, almost cyberpunk sort of
ambiance, made even more severe by the
omnipresent ice fog that envelops the
city every winter.
Fog doesn't usually exist in
environments that have temperatures so
far below freezing, but it does in
Yakuts because it gets so unfathomably
cold during the winter that warm air
generated by all of the buildings, cars,
machinery, and even people cannot
possibly rise and instantly freezes
instead, leaving behind a frozen cloud
that hovers above the streets all
throughout the winter. It can get so
cold during the winters that moisture
from your breath will condense and
freeze and form frost on your eyebrows
and eyelashes within minutes of you
stepping outside if you're unprepared
for it. Cars used in the city usually
only last for a couple of years before
they succumb to the elements, and they
have to be left running almost
continually throughout the winter in
order to prevent their batteries from
dying or their fuel from freezing and
turning into a slushy glue. Well, even
EVs will lose as much as 40 to 60% of
their usual advertised ranges in the
wintertime. Even just getting yourself
into or out of Yakuts, even in the
modern 21st century, is extremely
difficult and expensive because of its
climate and its sheer geographic
isolation. And it's probably one of the
most difficult large cities in the
entire world to actually visit or leave.
The easiest way is, of course, just to
fly. And flights to and from Moscow or
St. Petersburg usually only take about 6
or 7 hours. But delays and diversions
throughout the winter are common because
of visibility issues due to all of the
fog and occasionally due to when the
temperature gets low enough to even
freeze jet fuel. Driving is way, way
more difficult and interesting though
because, technically speaking, the city
still isn't even connected to any of the
rest of the outside world by road,
making it the largest city on the entire
Eurasian continent that isn't actually
connected to anywhere else directly by
road. Historically, until only about a
decade ago, Yakuts was only tenuously
connected to the rest of Russia by road
via the Lena Highway, which runs all the
way up to nearby Yakuts and beyond from
the main M58 Highway across the south
that roughly follows the route of the
Trans-Siberian Railway. Until 2014
though, most of the Lena Highway was
unpaved, which meant that during the
snowmelt and rainy season between May
and June, large sections of the highway
would transform into deep muddy
quagmires that would make it impassable
for weeks at a time, making it
impossible to drive to or from Yakuts
for large stretches of time. Even since
the whole length of the Lena Highway was
finally finished being paved in 2014,
the highway still doesn't technically
reach all the way into the city of
Yakuts itself because the highway runs
parallel to the east bank of the Lena
River. And Yakuts exists over on the
opposite wrong west bank of the river.
And still to date, there's never been a
single bridge built anywhere over the
whole length of the river.
During the long winter, while the cold
temperatures are brutal and hostile to
human life, they also make
transportation to and from Yakuts easier
because they result in the Lena River
freezing solid for nearly the entire
season, which enables cars, trucks, and
people to simply travel across the river
as if it were all a solid highway,
providing a critical overland link to
the rest of Russia. In the summer
season, when the temperatures are much
warmer and the river is liquid and
flowing, ferry services are offered
across the Lena that enable continued
transportation over to the highway. But
in between the summer and winter in the
shoulder seasons of the spring and fall,
transportation across the river becomes
almost impossible or at the very least
highly risky because the ice across the
river is either very thin and can't
support the weight of vehicles or it
gets broken up into a bazillion little
icebergs that make navigation
impossible. Yakuts still basically
becomes a logistical island in Eurasia
during these short shoulder seasons. And
even in the summer, the ferries that
operate across the river aren't enough
to satisfy the flow of all of the
passengers, fuel, and essential goods
that need to get to and from the city
and thus they're very expensive to take
for the average resident of the city.
Crossing the river on a ferry one way
over to the other side during the summer
can cost as much as 15%
of the median monthly wage in Yakuts and
it usually takes hours of time in long
waiting queues, which leads to some
people just deciding to risk their lives
by driving over the thin ice of the
river before and after the summer or to
cross it on foot instead, which
inevitably leads to stories of cars
sinking and people dying after crashing
through the ice nearly every year.
Supplies, including food, are still
overwhelmingly transported into Yakuts
from elsewhere either by river barges
that can reach it during the summer or
by expensive tractor trains and trucks
that can reach it during the winter,
which makes the price of goods within
the city significantly higher than you'd
probably otherwise expect and which
makes living there fairly expensive
despite the horrendous climate. To try
and solve all of these issues and to
finally permanently connect Yakuts to
the rest of the outside world, Russian
authorities have discussed building a
bridge over the Lena River between
Yakuts and the highway for decades, but
it's still never been managed. Any
bridge over the Lena River would have to
cope with extreme environmental
challenges. It would need to handle
-60°C
temperatures in the winter and positive
40°C
temperatures in the summer, while also
being able to withstand ice flows during
the spring season. This makes designing
and building the bridge more expensive
than other bridges in less extreme
environments otherwise would be. While
frequent geopolitical shocks to Russia
have kept delaying it as well. Initial
discussions on building the bridge in
the 1980s were canceled after the Soviet
Union's chaotic collapse. Later
discussions on building the bridge that
reemerged again in 2012 were similarly
canceled after Russia invaded Ukraine 2
years later in 2014 and annexed Crimea,
which then led to Russian federal
funding being diverted to building the
Crimean Bridge from the Russian mainland
instead. Then, when discussions on
building the bridge were revived for a
third time in 2019, the COVID-19
pandemic began the very next year. And
then Russia's greater invasion of
Ukraine in 2022 led to a torrent of
international financial sanctions that
complicated the project yet again.
Finally, beginning in 2024, the Russian
government actually did initiate the
process of building the bridge. But it
also initially projected that the cost
of the bridge would only come out to
about $855 million to finish. Since then
though, the estimated cost of building
it has dramatically ballooned by nearly
double to around $1.7 billion instead,
while the federal government has failed
to provide any extra funding as it
continues to pour most of its barren
money into the ongoing war in Ukraine.
So, it's pretty unclear at this point
when or even if the bridge will ever
actually be finished, meaning that
Yakuts will likely continue remaining a
logistical island for the foreseeable
future. A fascinating human city that
spits in the face of most common sense,
much like it has been doing for
centuries now. Now, I also want to
stress that Russia is known for a lot of
other things besides this one
fascinating city and their food culture
has absolutely got to be one of the top
things. From beef or mushroom stroganoff
to chicken Kiev, you can get everything
you need to cook delicious home-cooked
meals from Russia and Eastern Europe or
anywhere else just like these delivered
right to your doorstep through this
video's sponsor, HelloFresh. The concept
of HelloFresh is pretty straightforward.
You just visit the wrapper website and
select which meals you want to eat and
then the next week an insulated box will
show up on your doorstep filled with all
of the fresh, pre-portioned, and
partially prepared ingredients that you
need so that you can home-cook your
meals way faster than if you had just
wasted a bunch of time planning your
meals out, going to the grocery store,
and picking out the ingredients, and
then coming home and prepping. You can
also choose from a variety of different
menu options to suit all your needs and
tastes. From thin and wholesome to quick
and easy, vegetarian to family-friendly,
there's something for everyone to enjoy.
And HelloFresh knows that your plans
might change and life can get
unexpectedly busy. That's why they let
you easily customize your delivery from
week to week as well, allowing you to
tailor everything to your own schedule
by adjusting your delivery date or
skipping a week whenever you're not able
to cook at home. And best of all, the
meals themselves just taste really,
really good, too. That's the biggest
reason of all that I've been a loyal
customer myself to HelloFresh for years
now and why I've been making meals like
this amazing buffalo spiced chicken for
more than 4 years now. They're just the
best solution that I've ever found for
having regular, delicious, home-cooked
dinners. And if you want to see if I'm
right and improve the way that you eat,
too, now's a great time to do so because
when you click the button here on your
screen right now or follow the link
that's down below in the description and
use my code reallifelorefm at
hellofresh.com,
you'll get 10 free meals plus free
shipping. Free meals applied as discount
on first box, new or returning
subscribers only, varies by plan. So,
make sure to sign up today and once
again, click the button or use my code
reallifelorefm at hellofresh.com in
order to do so. It's a great way to help
us support my channel and get some
delicious, awesome food at the same
time. And as always, thank you so much
for watching.